Configure kubernetes metadata enrichment (#990)
elastic/ingest-docs: docs/en/ingest-management/elastic-agent/configuring-kubernetes-metadata.asciidoc

[[configuring-kubernetes-metadata]]
= Configuring Kubernetes metadata enrichment on {agent}

Kubernetes https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/current/monitor-kubernetes.html#beats-metadata[metadata] refer to contextual information extracted from Kubernetes resources. Metadata information enrich metrics and logs
collected from a Kubernetes cluster, enabling deeper insights into Kubernetes environments.

When the {agent}'s policy includes https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/kubernetes[{k8s} Integration] which configures the collection of Kubernetes related metrics and container logs, the mechanisms used for the metadata enrichment are:

* <<kubernetes-provider>> for log collection
* Kubernetes metadata enrichers for metrics

> In case the {agent}'s policy does not include Kubernetes integration, but {agent} runs inside a Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case the {agent}'s policy does not include the Kubernetes integration, but {agent} runs inside a Kubernetes
```
same as above.

> In case the {agent}'s policy does not include Kubernetes integration, but {agent} runs inside a Kubernetes
> environment the Kubernetes metadata are collected by the <<add_kubernetes_metadata-processor>>. The processor is configurable when {agent} is managed by {fleet}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case the {agent}'s policy does not include the Kubernetes integration, but {agent} runs inside a Kubernetes
environment, the Kubernetes metadata are collected by the <<add_kubernetes_metadata-processor>>. The processor is configurable when {agent} is managed by {fleet}.
```
Same as above, plus I'd add a comma here.

- For **Standalone {agent} configuration**:

[source,yaml]
.Elastic Agent Standalone manifest sample
------------------------------------------------
[output trunctated ...]
- data_stream:
       dataset: kubernetes.state_pod
        type: metrics
            metricsets:
        - state_pod
           add_metadata: true
            hosts:
              - 'kube-state-metrics:8080'
            period: 10s
            add_resource_metadata:
                  namespace:
                    enabled: true
                    #use_regex_include: false
                    include_labels: ["namespacelabel1"]
                    #use_regex_exclude: false
                    #exclude_labels: ["namespacelabel2"]
                 node:
                    enabled: true
                    #use_regex_include: false
                    include_labels: ["nodelabel2"]
                    include_annotations: ["nodeannotation1"]
                    #use_regex_exclude: false
                   #exclude_labels: ["nodelabel3"]
                #deployment: false
                #cronjob: false
------------------------------------------------

> The `add_resource_metadata` block configures the watchers enrichment functionality. See <<kubernetes-provider>> for full description of add_resource_metadata. Same configuration parameters apply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `add_resource_metadata` block configures the watcher's enrichment functionality. See <<kubernetes-provider>> for full description of add_resource_metadata. Same configuration parameters apply.
```

[[configuring-kubernetes-metadata]]
= Configuring Kubernetes metadata enrichment on {agent}

Kubernetes https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/current/monitor-kubernetes.html#beats-metadata[metadata] refer to contextual information extracted from Kubernetes resources. Metadata information enrich metrics and logs

> collected from a Kubernetes cluster, enabling deeper insights in Kubernetes environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collected from a Kubernetes cluster, enabling deeper insights into Kubernetes environments.
```

> When the elastic-agent's policy includes https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/kubernetes[{k8s} Integration] which configures the collection of Kubernetes related metrics and container logs, the mechanisms used for the metadata enrichment are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the {agent}'s policy includes the https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/kubernetes[{k8s} Integration] which configures the collection of Kubernetes related metrics and container logs, the mechanisms used for the metadata enrichment are:
```
We have a couple of ahndy variables we can use for agent:
`{agents}` = Elastic Agents
`{agent}` = Elastic Agent

* <<kubernetes-provider>> for log collection
* Kubernetes metadata enrichers for metrics

> In case the elastic-agent's policy does not include Kubernetes integration, but {agent} runs inside a Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case the {agent}'s policy does not include the Kubernetes integration, but {agent} runs inside a Kubernetes
```

environment the Kubernetes metadata are collected by the <<add_kubernetes_metadata-processor>>. The processor is configurable when {agent} is managed by {fleet}.

[discrete]
== Kubernetes Logs

When it comes to container logs collection, the <<kubernetes-provider>> is used. It monitors for pod resources
in the cluster and associates each container log file with a corresponding pod's container object.

> That way, when a log file is parsed and an event is ready to be published to ES, the internal mechanism knows to which actual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That way, when a log file is parsed and an event is ready to be published to {es}, the internal mechanism knows to which actual
```
`{es}` resolves to `Elasticsearch`

> That way, when a log file is parsed and an event is ready to be published to ES, the internal mechanism knows to which actual
> container this log file belongs to. The linkage is established by the container's ID, which forms an integral part of the filename for the log.
> The Kubernetes autodiscover provider has already collected all the metadata for that container, leveraging pod, namespace and node watchers. Thus the events are enriched with the relevant metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That way, when a log file is parsed and an event is ready to be published to {es}, the internal mechanism knows to which actual
container this log file belongs. The linkage is established by the container's ID, which forms an integral part of the filename for the log.
The Kubernetes autodiscover provider has already collected all the metadata for that container, leveraging pod, namespace and node watchers. Thus, the events are enriched with the relevant metadata.
```

The `{es}` variable resolves to `Elasticsearch`.

In order to configure the metadata collection, the Kubernetes provider needs to be configured. 

> All the available configuration options of **Kubernetes provider** can be found in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/current/kubernetes-provider.html[here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the available configuration options of the **Kubernetes provider** can be found in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/current/kubernetes-provider.html[here].
```

> In more details:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

I suggest removing this line. I think people will understand the rest of the page to be examples.

* For **Standalone {agent} configuration:**

Follow information of `add_resource_metadata` parameter of <<kubernetes-provider>>

[source,yaml]

> .Example on how to configure kubernetes metadata enrichment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example of how to configure kubernetes metadata enrichment
```

------------------------------------------------
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: agent-node-datastreams
  namespace: kube-system
  labels:
    k8s-app: elastic-agent
data:
  agent.yml: |-
    kubernetes.provider
      add_resource_metadata:
        namespace:
          #use_regex_include: false
          include_labels: ["namespacelabel1"]
          #use_regex_exclude: false
          #exclude_labels: ["namespacelabel2"]
        node:
          #use_regex_include: false
          include_labels: ["nodelabel2"]
          include_annotations: ["nodeannotation1"]
          #use_regex_exclude: false
          #exclude_labels: ["nodelabel3"]
        #deployment: false
        #cronjob: false
------------------------------------------------

* **Managed {agent} configuration**:

The Kubernetes provider can be configured following the steps in <<advanced-kubernetes-managed-by-fleet>>.

[discrete]
== Kubernetes metrics

> The {agent} metrics collection implements metadata enrichment based on watchers, a mechanism used to continuously monitor Kubernetes resources for changes and updates. 
> In more details, the different datasets share a set of resource watchers. Those watchers(pod, node, namespace, deployment, daemonset etc.) are responsible for watching for all different resource events (creation, update and deletion) by subscribing to Kubernetes watch API. This enables real-time synchronization of application state with the state of the Kubernetes cluster.
> So they keep an up-to-date shared cache store of all the resources' informations and metadata. Whenever metrics are collected by the different sources (kubelet, kube-state-metrics), before they get published to {es} as events, they get enriched with needed metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {agent} metrics collection implements metadata enrichment based on watchers, a mechanism used to continuously monitor Kubernetes resources for changes and updates. 
Specifically, the different datasets share a set of resource watchers. Those watchers (pod, node, namespace, deployment, daemonset etc.) are responsible for watching for all different resource events (creation, update and deletion) by subscribing to the Kubernetes watch API. This enables real-time synchronization of application state with the state of the Kubernetes cluster.
So, they keep an up-to-date shared cache store of all the resources' information and metadata. Whenever metrics are collected by the different sources (kubelet, kube-state-metrics), before they get published to {es} as events, they are enriched with needed metadata.
```

[[configuring-kubernetes-metadata]]

> = Configuring kubernetes metadata enrichment on {agent} managed by {fleet}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Configuring Kubernetes metadata enrichment on {agent} managed by {fleet}
```
Please also capitalize any other instances of Kubernetes.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a single line what kubernetes metadata enrichment is 

Maybe a link here https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/current/monitor-kubernetes.html#beats-metadata

> When the elastic-agent's policy includes kubernetes integration which configures the collection of kubernetes related metrics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the elastic-agent's policy includes https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/kubernetes[{k8s} Integration] which configures the collection of kubernetes related metrics
```

and container logs the mechanisms used for the metadata enrichment are:

> a. kubernetes provider for log collection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

- <<kubernetes-provider>> for log collection
- kubernetes metadata enrichers for metrics
```

b. kubernetes metadata enrichers for metrics

In case the elastic-agent's policy does not include kubernetes integration, but {agent} runs inside a kubernetes

> environment the kubernetes metadata are collected by the https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/metricbeat/current/add-kubernetes-metadata.html[add_kubernetes_metadata processor]. The processor is configurable when {agent} is managed by {fleet}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
environment the kubernetes metadata are collected by the <<add_kubernetes_metadata-processor>>. The processor is configurable when {agent} is managed by {fleet}.
```

> environment the kubernetes metadata are collected by the https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/metricbeat/current/add-kubernetes-metadata.html[add_kubernetes_metadata processor]. The processor is configurable when {agent} is managed by {fleet}.

Reviewer 2: NOTE: This document focuses on {agent} configuration solely. In case beats metadata enrichment for kubernetes needed advice relevant filebeat and metricbeat links

Author: after the beats prs

[discrete]
== Kubernetes Logs

> When it comes to container logs collection, the kubernetes autodiscover provider is used. It watches for pod resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When it comes to container logs collection, the <<kubernetes-provider>> is used. It watches for pod resources
```

> When it comes to container logs collection, the kubernetes autodiscover provider is used. It watches for pod resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When it comes to container logs collection, the kubernetes autodiscover provider is used. It watches for pod events
```

> in the cluster and associates each container log file under the log path provided with a pod's container object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the cluster and associates each container log file with a corresponding pod container object.
```

That way when a log file is parsed and an event is ready to be published to ES, the internal mechanism knows to which actual

> container this log file belongs to. The link is achieved through the container's ID which is part of the log file name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
container this log file belongs to. The linkage is established by the container's ID, which forms an integral part of the filename for the log.
```

The kubernetes autodiscover provider has already collected all the metadata for that container, leveraging pod, namespace and node watchers. Thus the events are enriched with the relevant metadata.

> In order to configure the metadata collection, the kubernetes provider needs to be configured. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In more details:

* For *Standalone {agent}**
Follow information of `add_resource_metadata` parameter of <<kubernetes-provider>>

[source,yaml]
.Example how to configure kubernetes metadata enrichment
------------------------------------------------
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: agent-node-datastreams
  namespace: kube-system
  labels:
    k8s-app: elastic-agent
data:
  agent.yml: |-
    kubernetes.provider
      add_resource_metadata:
        namespace:
          #use_regex_include: false
          include_labels: ["namespacelabel1"]
          #use_regex_exclude: false
          #exclude_labels: ["namespacelabel2"]
        node:
          #use_regex_include: false
          include_labels: ["nodelabel2"]
          include_annotations: ["nodeannotation1"]
          #use_regex_exclude: false
          #exclude_labels: ["nodelabel3"]
        #deployment: false
        #cronjob: false
---------------------------------------------------

- For **Managed {agent}**:

See <<advanced-kubernetes-managed-by-fleet>>

```

All the available configuration options of Kubernetes provider can be found in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/current/kubernetes-provider.html[here].

The Kubernetes provider can be configured following the steps in <<advanced-kubernetes-managed-by-fleet>>.

[discrete]
== Kubernetes metrics

> Metrics collection triggers metricbeat with kubernetes module and related metricsets enabled under the hood.

Reviewer 2: I would delete this line

The kubernetes metricsets use the so called kubernetes metadata enrichers mechanism. What this does is that the different metricsets share a set of resource watchers. Those watchers(pod, node, namespace, deployment, daemonset etc.) are responsible for watching for all the different resources creation, update and deletion by subscribing to kubernetes watch API. 
So they keep in an up to date shared store all the resource informations and metadata. Whenever metrics are collected by the different sources (kubelet, kube-state-metrics), before they get published to ES as events, they get enriched with needed metadata.

The metadata enrichment can be configured by editing the kubernetes integration.

> It can be disabled by switching off the `Add Metadata` toggle in every metricset. Exrta resource metadata like 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Only in metrics collection**, metadata enrichement can be disabled by switching off the `Add Metadata` toggle in every dataset. Exrta resource metadata like 
```

> node, namespace labels and annotations, as well as deployment and cronjob information can be configured per metricset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
node, namespace labels and annotations, as well as deployment and cronjob information can be configured per dataset.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For **Managed {agent}**: 

```

image::images/kubernetes_metadata.png[metadata configuration]

> 

Reviewer 2: NOTE: `add_resource_metadata` block needs to be configured to all datasets that are enabled

> 

Reviewer 2: - For **Standalone {agent}**: 

[source,yaml]
.Elastic Agent Standalone manifest sample
------------------------------------------------
[output trunctated ...]
- data_stream:
       dataset: kubernetes.state_pod
        type: metrics
            metricsets:
        - state_pod
           add_metadata: true
            hosts:
              - 'kube-state-metrics:8080'
            period: 10s
            add_resource_metadata:
                  namespace:
                    enabled: true
                    #use_regex_include: false
                    include_labels: ["namespacelabel1"]
                    #use_regex_exclude: false
                    #exclude_labels: ["namespacelabel2"]
                 node:
                    enabled: true
                    #use_regex_include: false
                    include_labels: ["nodelabel2"]
                    include_annotations: ["nodeannotation1"]
                    #use_regex_exclude: false
                   #exclude_labels: ["nodelabel3"]
                #deployment: false
                #cronjob: false
---------------------------------------------------

The `add_resource_metadata` block configures the watchers enrichment functionality. See <<kubernetes-provider>> for full description of add_resource_metadata. Same configuration parameters apply.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For **Standalone {agent}**: 

[source,yaml]
.Elastic Agent Standalone manifest sample
------------------------------------------------
[output trunctated ...]
- data_stream:
       dataset: kubernetes.state_pod
        type: metrics
            metricsets:
        - state_pod
           add_metadata: true
            hosts:
              - 'kube-state-metrics:8080'
            period: 10s
            add_resource_metadata:
                  namespace:
                    enabled: true
                    #use_regex_include: false
                    include_labels: ["namespacelabel1"]
                    #use_regex_exclude: false
                    #exclude_labels: ["namespacelabel2"]
                 node:
                    enabled: true
                    #use_regex_include: false
                    include_labels: ["nodelabel2"]
                    include_annotations: ["nodeannotation1"]
                    #use_regex_exclude: false
                   #exclude_labels: ["nodelabel3"]
                #deployment: false
                #cronjob: false
---------------------------------------------------

The `add_resource_metadata` block configures the watchers enrichment functionality. See <<kubernetes-provider>> for full description of add_resource_metadata. Same configuration parameters apply.
```

[[configuring-kubernetes-metadata]]
= Configuring Kubernetes metadata enrichment on {agent}

> Kubernetes https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/current/monitor-kubernetes.html#beats-metadata[metadata] refer to contextual information extracted from Kubernetes resources. This information enrich metrics and logs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/current/monitor-kubernetes.html#beats-metadata[metadata] refer to contextual information extracted from Kubernetes resources. Metadata information enrich metrics and logs
```

collected from a Kubernetes cluster, enabling deeper insights in Kubernetes environments.

When the elastic-agent's policy includes https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/kubernetes[{k8s} Integration] which configures the collection of Kubernetes related metrics and container logs, the mechanisms used for the metadata enrichment are:
* <<kubernetes-provider>> for log collection
* Kubernetes metadata enrichers for metrics

In case the elastic-agent's policy does not include Kubernetes integration, but {agent} runs inside a Kubernetes
environment the Kubernetes metadata are collected by the <<add_kubernetes_metadata>> processor. The processor is configurable when {agent} is managed by {fleet}.

[discrete]
== Kubernetes Logs

When it comes to container logs collection, the <<kubernetes-provider>> is used. It monitors for pod resources
in the cluster and associates each container log file with a corresponding pod's container object.

> That way when a log file is parsed and an event is ready to be published to ES, the internal mechanism knows to which actual

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That way, when a log file is parsed and an event is ready to be published to ES, the internal mechanism knows to which actual
```

container this log file belongs to. The linkage is established by the container's ID, which forms an integral part of the filename for the log.
The Kubernetes autodiscover provider has already collected all the metadata for that container, leveraging pod, namespace and node watchers. Thus the events are enriched with the relevant metadata.

In order to configure the metadata collection, the Kubernetes provider needs to be configured. 

> All the available configuration options of Kubernetes provider can be found in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/current/kubernetes-provider.html[here].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the available configuration options of **Kubernetes provider** can be found in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/current/kubernetes-provider.html[here].
```

In more details:

> * For **Standalone {agent}**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For **Standalone {agent} configuration:**
```

Follow information of `add_resource_metadata` parameter of <<kubernetes-provider>>

[source,yaml]
.Example how to configure kubernetes metadata enrichment
------------------------------------------------
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: agent-node-datastreams
  namespace: kube-system
  labels:
    k8s-app: elastic-agent
data:
  agent.yml: |-
    kubernetes.provider
      add_resource_metadata:
        namespace:
          #use_regex_include: false
          include_labels: ["namespacelabel1"]
          #use_regex_exclude: false
          #exclude_labels: ["namespacelabel2"]
        node:
          #use_regex_include: false
          include_labels: ["nodelabel2"]
          include_annotations: ["nodeannotation1"]
          #use_regex_exclude: false
          #exclude_labels: ["nodelabel3"]
        #deployment: false
        #cronjob: false
------------------------------------------------

> * For **Managed {agent}**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For **Managed {agent} configuration**:
```

The Kubernetes provider can be configured following the steps in <<advanced-kubernetes-managed-by-fleet>>.

[discrete]
== Kubernetes metrics

The {agent} metrics collection implements metadata enrichment based on watchers, a mechanism used to continuously monitor Kubernetes resources for changes and updates. 
In more details, the different datasets share a set of resource watchers. Those watchers(pod, node, namespace, deployment, daemonset etc.) are responsible for watching for all different resource events (creation, update and deletion) by subscribing to Kubernetes watch API. This enables real-time synchronization of application state with the state of the Kubernetes cluster.

> So they keep in an up to date shared cache store all the resources' informations and metadata. Whenever metrics are collected by the different sources (kubelet, kube-state-metrics), before they get published to {es} as events, they get enriched with needed metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So they keep in an up-to-date shared cache store of all the resources' informations and metadata. Whenever metrics are collected by the different sources (kubelet, kube-state-metrics), before they get published to {es} as events, they get enriched with needed metadata.
```

The metadata enrichment can be configured by editing the Kubernetes integration.
**Only in metrics collection**, metadata enrichement can be disabled by switching off the `Add Metadata` toggle in every dataset. Exrta resource metadata like 
node, namespace labels and annotations, as well as deployment and cronjob information can be configured per dataset.

> - For **Managed {agent}**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For **Managed {agent} configuration**:
```

image::images/kubernetes_metadata.png[metadata configuration]

NOTE: add_resource_metadata block needs to be configured to all datasets that are enabled

> - For **Standalone {agent}**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For **Standalone {agent} configuration**:
```
